You ready?
>> Yep.
>> Okay. Today we are going to talk about
the refugee protests.
Okay. Today's video is called refugee
riots, salience and storytelling. And
what I want to do today is look at the
recent growth in uh refugee asylum
seeker protests here in the UK. and I
want to use it to explain some really
important terms and concepts about media
and in particular economics and
political media. We're going to talk
about salience, storytelling, wedge
issues and the bifocated society and uh
you're going to understand how the media
works. Okay, so first a little bit of
context for our international viewers.
Uh in the last uh month or two there
have been lots and lots of protests
outside hotels which are being used by
the government to house asylum seekers.
Uh asylum seekers have come they have
not been processed and they're being put
up in hotels and it has led to lots and
lots of protests all over the country by
British people saying they're not happy
with asylum seekers being kept in in
hotels. Okay. So, for a long time, I
avoided speaking about immigration on
the channel because I am an economist
and I like to focus on the economy and
things which I'm an expert on. But we
started to see a couple of years ago
like the growth and the growth and the
growth in people talking about
immigration. The comments basically
saying, "What you talking about? The
problem is not rich people. The problem
is not inequality. The problem is
immigration. Why don't you talk about
that?" Um, and we saw the popularity of
this grow and grow and grow. And it
started to become increasingly clear
that basically anti-immigration
sentiment was becoming basically the key
opposition to ideas about taxing the
rich. So I did a video a couple of years
ago, my first video on immigration,
which we'll we'll link here so you can
see. And really by and large I haven't
touched it so much since but I wanted to
do a video on it now because I think
it's again become really relevant to our
work on dealing with the problem with
the economy dealing with the problem on
inequality. And I think what we've seen
is I came back from holiday about
two months ago now two and a half months
ago and at the time it really felt like
we kind of had our foot on the neck of
the media basically. Everybody was
talking about wealth taxes. Everybody
was constantly asking politicians, why
don't you do something about wealth
taxes? Why don't you do something about
inequality? And there was kind of an
effort made by the media, especially by
the right-wing media, to kind of
discredit the ideas on wealth taxes. And
really, to be honest, it kind of failed.
I think they didn't really successfully
poke many holes in the idea of taxing
the rich more, in the idea of doing
something about inequality, and it felt
like we had won the argument. But then
what basically happened was the media
pretty much stopped talking about
inequality and started to talk more and
more and more and more about refugees
and asylum seekers and these protests at
these hotels. And what this teaches us
is the importance of the first media
idea we're going to explain today which
is salience.
Okay. So what is salience? I'm going to
explain what salience is by telling a
story about when I first started talking
about economics in the media. So, I
started this YouTube channel in 2020 and
at the time I started to do quite a
little bit of like radio talking about
inequality, talking about the economy.
Um, I was lucky because I was one of the
first guys who realized there was going
to be a big inequality crisis, that
there was going to be a big inflation
crisis. Um, so I started to tell
everybody about it and I went on loads
and loads of radio shows. Um, if you
look back through this channel through
like the really, really, really early
videos. We used to upload all of my
radio interviews. So you'll you'll see
them on there and you'll see I was
basically saying like years in advance
we were going to have an inequality
crisis and we're going to have an
inflation crisis. Um, and I was in a
really strong position basically because
I was a very good economist. I had a
very good history. I was one of the top
traders in the city. And economists who
are this good basically don't normally
appear in the media because they get
paid a lot more to work for banks. Um so
in my personal opinion I was kind of
head and shoulders above the competition
talking about the economy. I went to
loads of shows. I spoke about the
economy. I was doing really well and
eventually I got invited to go on with
Nick Ferrari who is the most right-wing
presenter on LBC. So again for our
foreign viewers LBC is like a really
popular talk radio show in this country.
People call in they talk about the
politics mainly politics the economy
social issues um and they like to
consider themselves like neither left
nor right. They have like more leftwing
presenters like James O'Brien and they
have more right-wing presenters like
Nick Ferrari and Nick Ferrari is
considered the most right-wing one. And
I got called up late one evening. I was
playing football with my friends and
they wanted me to come on and talk about
what I thought was the economy
basically. Um, and I I broke my rib
playing football, but I really wanted to
do it because Nick Ferrari is like their
big presenter. So, I barely slept and I
went on early in the morning on Nick
Ferrari and I want to talk about the
economy. I want to talk about
inequality. I wanted to talk about how
COVID was massively increasing
inequality, how it was going to cause an
economic crisis. And what Nick Ferrari
did was he didn't allow the conversation
to ever be about anything except for
extremely narrow consumption decisions
about what kind of energy provider an
ordinary family uses. And every time I
tried to move it to something bigger
about the economy, about inequality, he
was like, "What energy provider should
our viewers use?" Again and again and
again. And that is an example of
salience because salience is not about
winning the argument. It is about
controlling what topics are discussed.
It's about controlling the topic of
discussion. And once you start thinking
about salience, so my background is is
not in media. My background is in in
maths and economics and and trading. And
in my heart of hearts, I'm like a very
sort of logicy mathsy guy. And I think a
lot of people like that, they think that
political debate is about debate and
about winning the argument. I make my
points, you make your point, and we we
the public will decide who's the winner.
But what this Nick Ferrari interview
showed me is a massive thing that you
can do is to make sure you basically
understand what is it that my opponent
is good at? What what area is he good
at? What area is he weak at? What area
am I good at? What area am I weak at?
And you make sure that you only ever
speak about the area that you are strong
at. And you don't allow the subject to
to be anything that your opponent might
be good at. that is controlling the
salience. Salience is basically how
visible a particular topic is. So rather
than try to win the debate, you try to
make sure only one side of the debate is
visible, has any volume gets heard and
that is the side of the debate side of
the debate upon which you are strong.
And this idea of uh salience in a debate
or in a conversation which if you keep
an eye out for it you will see all over
the media. You will see everybody doing
in every political conversation. It
doesn't just apply to an individual
conversation or an individual debate. We
can apply it to the media as a whole,
one media show or basically like the
whole media like all of the TV, all of
the newspapers, all of the online social
media. What topics are getting discussed
and what topics are not getting
discussed? And back when I came back
from holiday in late June, early July,
the economy and inequality and taxation
and taxation of the rich were being
discussed every single day on every
single news show. We had massive
salience. We we were the issue that was
being spoken about. We were the issue
that was dominating media time. And now
if you look at the TV, what you see is
immigration and asylum seekers and
refugee rights, refugee protests outside
hotels are being spoken about much much
much more. And issues of inequality,
taxation, distribution have kind of been
put on the shelf which basically means
we as much as we maybe won the argument
on the economy, we are now losing the
battle for salience. So how do you win
the battle for salience? And that brings
us to my next important point which
we're going to discuss about the media
which is storytelling.
Okay. So storytelling. Now I if you have
been watching for a long time you'll
know this or if you go back and watch
some of our older videos I have been
saying for years that in this country
what would happen was uh Rishi Sunnak
would fail really badly for popularity.
Um Karma and Labour would have a massive
electoral win. then Kisarma and Labour
would fail really badly and then Nigel
Farage and reform would win. Uh I've
been saying this for years. I said this
is right back when Boris Johnson was
still prime minister and um British
Senate was coming in. Uh so I've made a
lot of very good correct predictions on
politics which were not consensus at the
time. And the way I've been able to make
these correct predictions is simply
through understanding two things which
is the economy and storytelling. Okay.
So it wasn't particularly difficult to
predict the failure of successive UK
governments if you understand our basic
economic problem which is we have
rapidly growing inequality of wealth
that is sucking wealth out of the middle
class and the government which is
sucking spending power out of the
economy. It's accumulating wealth with
the very rich which is driving asset
prices up which is making it harder for
ordinary people to live. Because we knew
that both Rishi Sunnak and the
Conservatives and Kistama and Labour
would come in and do nothing about this
growing inequality. We basically knew
that they would fail economically. It's
like you've got a hole in the bottom of
your boat. Wealth is sucking out of that
hole at an unbelievably rapid
accelerating pace. If you don't patch
that hole, you're going to fail. So, it
was relatively easy to know that we
would have a a sequence of failing
governments. But how was I able also to
predict the rise of reform and the rise
of Nigel Farage um who for those of you
who might not know who not from the UK
are our sort of new farright party and
leader that was because I understood the
importance of storytelling. So when you
have an economic crisis especially what
we have had in the last 5 10 sort of
coming up to 20 years now a long-term
economic crisis which seems protracted
feels like it has no end feels like it's
going to get worse and worse ordinary
families are really struggling you
create
this urgent need in the mind of the
public for something new something
different right people do not want it
people can have a sense for like the
direction that their country is headed
and the direction that living standards
are headed. And if you go to a place
like India or like China where living
standards have for a long time been
worse than they are in the UK because
people have a sense that life is getting
better and their kids will be richer
than they are, they're happy to accept
that. But when people sense that their
life is getting worse, people really
worry. People don't consider that to be
acceptable and they want something
different. And what people think they
want is like a new economic model or a
new way of dealing with with the economy
that doesn't collapse. But the truth or
maybe they want a new political system.
But the truth is most people are not
experts on the economy and politics. And
what people really want is a new story.
People want there to be a new story that
does not involve their kids being poor,
that does not involve them getting worse
and worse off over time. And it creates
this massive demand for basically a new
story. There's this quote that I use
from Milton Freriedman, the American
economist, which is at times of crisis,
the solution will be chosen from the
ideas lying around at the time. If you
have a collapsing economy, it creates
what I think of as a kind of economic
boom for stories and ideas, which is
when people are extremely unsatisfied
with the status quo. They start to look
around and think, well, what are our
other options? And that meant that
because we knew we would have a a
sequence of failing governments because
the governments wouldn't deal with
growing wealth inequality,
anybody who could put together a
compelling story that was different,
that was new would inevitably get drawn
into power. And what really matters with
regards to these stories is again the
salience. So when the economy is
collapsing, lots of different people
will have lots of different ideas about
how do we fix the economy. And basically
whichever one is loudest is going to be
the guy that will win. When you
understand this basic idea, number one,
until we deal with growing inequality,
living standards continue to worsen,
which means we have this continuing
sense of collapsing economy and
desperate need for change.
you you kind of always know what's going
to happen in politics, which is whoever
is the loudest alternative voice at any
point in time is going to win the next
election. Um, and Labour won the last
election with a very very simple story
of the Conservatives are really
Let's kick them out. And that basically
won. Um, and that was that was the
dominant story of the time. But then
Labour come in and you get this even
deeper kind of sto power vacuum
essentially which is in this country
we've only had one we've only had two
political parties in power for nearly
100 years essentially and one of them
was massively discredited then the other
one comes in basically purely on the
story of we are not the first party and
they become massively discredited and
really you end up in a situation of
whoever can control the media salience
whoever has the biggest story of being
new and different will become prime
minister. And if you look at the
situation now, it was always pretty
clear that Nigel Faraj and reform and
the far right would win. And I want to
be clear when I say that this is not all
UK specific. The same thing is happening
in basically every country in the entire
western world. When your center left has
no story and your center right has no
story, really anyone else who has a
compelling story can basically walk into
your president's or prime minister's
office. So that is where we are
basically um we have this collapsing
economy. We have this vacuum of stories
and it becomes in a bizarre way like
fantastically easy to become president
or prime minister and that is why you're
seeing across the world sort of random
guys who are not even politicians were
not even political parties which didn't
even exist recently suddenly turning up
becoming president becoming prime
minister you know you saw macaron in
France we saw Trump in the US we've seen
the collapse of you know we've seen the
rise of the farright parties basically
across Europe new political parties
taking power in Italy um
when the economy is collapsing, anyone
who can tell a compelling story will be
able to take control of that country.
And the problem with that at the moment
is really if you look around the
political world at the moment, there are
basically no loud stories other than the
far right. So the far right has like a
pretty clear story that everybody knows.
Like if I were to pull someone in in my
country and say, "What do you think
Nigel Farage or reform stand for? What
do they believe?" If I did the same
thing in your country, wherever you
were, people would know. They say they
want there to be lower immigration. They
want there to be fewer asylum seekers.
You know that that's like that's what
they want. It's really really clear. But
if I was to ask somebody, what is the
story of Labour or Karma in this
country? If I was to ask somebody what
is the story of the Democrats in your
country? um I don't think they would
know you know you know and there there
are groups of of politicians in society
you know I went on the rest is politics
a few weeks ago which is the biggest
politics podcast here in the UK um if
you watch if you want to see it you can
there the videos there online um and
it's a very high-profile podcast and
it's two sort of centrist politicians uh
one is from the center left party one is
from the center right they're they're
neither of them active in politics
anymore you go on on there. There's a
lot of hand ringing about the failures
of Labor, the failures of the
Conservative Party, the the failures of
the far right reform and Nigel Farage
and for all that they like to criticize
the the existing political
system, what is their story? What is
their story? I mean, I think it it seems
to be largely about criticizing other
groups. Um, so that that's where we are,
you know. You know, if we talk about the
left, if I was to bring someone in on
the street and say, "What do you think?"
You know, the left believes in this
country, what is their story? Um, you
know, differentiate a little between the
center and the center left and the left.
The center right, the conservatives are
basically dead. Really, what you have is
you only have one group that has a story
and people get behind that story. They
support that story and in the absence of
competing stories, basically you win. So
we have this period of time where
there's this massive absence of stories
which creates this unbelievable power of
storytelling and yet seemingly no group
in society other than the far right has
been able or is able to tell a
compelling political economic story. So
now we've established these two really
important concepts that you need to
understand if you want to take political
power salience and storytelling. I want
to talk about another element which um
the far right and the um the refugee
protesters have have done really well in
understanding these concepts. Um so one
of these protests which which they're
very regular now is super super close to
where I live and and I went down there
with with Jack the cameraman who films
these videos a few weeks ago. Um to be
honest more than anything just to sort
of witness what was happening because um
I was worried I am worried about this
sort of growing growing movement. Um and
one thing that I found really really
interesting that I saw there was there
were enormous the actual number of
protesters. So there were protesters
protesting against hotels. There were
counterprotesters um protesting against
the protesters. Um the number of
protesters was not that huge but what
there were a huge number of was citizen
journalists. And what I mean when I say
citizen journalist is somebody who's not
presumably professional journalist. um
just a guy or a woman with a camera sort
of live streaming, doing selfies,
showing the showing the protest and
uploading the video to Facebook. And
there were loads and loads and loads of
these guys. Um and it was really really
noticeable how much media presence there
was relative to what was actually a
relatively small protest. And I think
what that shows is basically that the
the far right has done a much better job
in a sense of understanding storytelling
and salience and also understanding a
thing which I've spoken about a lot on
this channel which is the need to be
present online. So I think a thing has
happened in
media especially politics media in the
last few years which is there is there
has been a massive shift towards online
media. I think this has really
accelerated during co which is more and
more and more people want to get their
news online on Instagram on YouTube on
Facebook and it has created this real
opportunity
to aggressively dominate the the
salience of online platforms because the
existing media institutions like BBC,
Sky News, the existing political bodies
have just been slow to move into it. And
what this what is interesting about
these citizen journalists is these
citizen journalists individually the
vast majority of them won't get anything
like the number of views that we get on
this video that we go on our channel.
But the way that they succeed is that
there is simply an enormous amount of
them. And I think what this shows is in
a in a weird way is kind of
inspirational because I've been saying
for a long time, you know, I made the
decision rather than writing for the big
newspapers to try to do a push for
online and a push for social because I
felt that that's where people were. And
recently I've been trying to encourage
our viewers, you to create more yourself
and to make more videos yourself and
throw things out there. And that is
basically because people are online
nowadays and there is there's this this
massive space. I think what you see is
stories stories are these really
interesting things. Stories are kind of
like they're like a computer virus in a
way. Like we like to think that the
media comes in and decides what stories
get placed where. But as the media has
lost power and people have moved online,
you're kind of seeing it's more like a
kind of like a virus model almost like
this co model which is if enough people
get out there and spread it, it can
spread really really quickly and you can
you can dominate the salience of a
subject without necessarily having that
top level media support. And I think
that is what the farright have done
super super super well. And they've
created this kind of I mean obviously
they do have media support, they do have
financial support. You have things like
GB News in this country which is you
know a very well funded lossmaking media
channel that supports these farright
ideas. You have obviously people like
Elon Musk buying things like Twitter but
they have really effectively spread
these messages from the ground up from
the bottom. And I think really we need
to learn a lesson from these guys which
is I think people like me I need to be
constantly making these ideas these
messages these the idea that the problem
is inequality the idea that living
standards will get worse because of
growing inequality. I need to make that
as simple as possible again and again
and again so that people like you can
take the message and run with it. I
think what you've seen also with these
guys is basically the importance of
being like multiplatform. So we're
really popular on YouTube. We're really
popular on Instagram. We're popular with
like basically younger people, people in
their 20s, 30s, 40s. We're less popular
with older people in their 50s or 60s.
Um and that is largely because those
guys are on Facebook and we are not
popular on Facebook basically. So what
you have seen is and this is the the
last concept I need to add before I get
on to well one more
phenomenal
ability to craft a simple message give
it to ordinary people and this
unbelievable message discipline around a
simple message to flood the zone tell
everybody the problem is immigrants get
everybody down to the protests make your
videos put them on Facebook tell your
friends tell your family tell your mom
and what you've basically seen is the
far right using basically exactly the
model that I've been saying we need to
do for years, which is we put a message
out on here and all of you take it, run
with it, make your own videos, spread it
in your community, spread it amongst
your family. And what they're shown is
it works. It works. And um we need to do
it. We need to do it better. We need to
copy them. So to be clear here, I am
trying to make a pitch that essentially
this needs to be the story. The story
needs to be growing inequality of wealth
is destroying living standards. If you
don't do anything about the
billionaires, your kids will be poor.
We've got plenty of videos out there
that I think support that story. The
best ones are probably the squeeze out
or the the Channel 4 video with
Christian G Murphy. But we need to get
behind this. We need discipline. Um, and
I want this video
really, this is a a call out to to the
left, to the center, to the centrist
dads. If you want to stop Nigel Farage
from winning the next election, you need
to get behind a story. Um, you need a
story. Um, I think we are the second
loudest story in the room. I think we
are a story that can win, but we need
you to get behind it. We need some
measure of discipline. We need people to
be willing to put their egos down for a
little bit. Pick the message that's
going to win. Get behind it. Get out
there. Make the videos. Get spreading
it. Because if we do not win the battle
for salience, we will lose the control
of the country. The last thing I wanted
to talk about was introduce this concept
of a bifocated society. And this is
something which I've been thinking about
a lot recently, which is the idea that
as wealth inequality increases,
it kind of splits society into two
groups, which is wealth gets sucked out
of ordinary families and they start to
become poor. But you have this group of
societies, this group of families at the
top which become unbelievably wealthy.
And as the top gets richer and the rest
get poorer, these groups kind of
separate off from one another. And what
that leads to is a situation where all
of these elites in society which
includes the politicians and the policy
makers and the economists basically have
a very poor understanding
of what is happening in ordinary
people's lives. And it makes them
basically unable to sort of view these
people with compassion. And I've been
thinking about this more through going
to these protests and talking to people
at the protests because what I found
when I went to the protests was a lot of
people who
have had a very difficult time in the
last few years um and in particular had
a difficult time during CO and since CO
that have become very very distrustful
of the societies that they live in. And
what struck me really was
how in many cases they were kind of
right to be distrustful because they
think the politicians don't care about
them and to a degree that's right the
politicians don't care about them. Um
they feel like they're ignored and to a
degree that they are ignored. um they
feel like their financial
position is bad and their financial
futures are uncertain
and those
are true facts as well. Um and they
don't really understand why.
And I think it's important to recognize
that if you put somebody in that kind of
situation where
their life is insecure, their future is
insecure, their family's insecure,
things are changing, they don't
understand why, they don't feel
connected at all to the media on the TV
or like like they're having the
situation explained to them. It's kind
of normal to go crazy.
And
this reminded me, so I've not spoken
about this much on the channel, but my
my parents are Mormons and that
Mormonism is a kind of a very strict
kind of American Christianity. Um, and
what's interesting about that is a lot
of people think that Mormonism only
exists in America, but there's actually
a lot of Mormonis, a lot of Mormons all
over the world. And the reason that
there's a lot of Mormons all over the
world is the Mormons send young men and
young women dressed in very smart sort
of white shirts all around the world to
knock on people's doors and to tell
them, "Hey, do you want to become a
Mormon?" And it is surprisingly
successful. And three of my grandparents
were converted to Mormonism by these
guys who came knocking on the doors. And
sometimes I've wondered, you know, what
it was about, you know, my my dad's
parents are very sort of stiff upper lip
English
workingass people, why they became
Mormons. But, you know, my granddad, he
came back from the war. He was he was a
member, he was in the army since before
the war started. You know, he probably
killed people in Egypt.
And I think maybe he was in a bit of a
confused emotional space.
and you get a couple of young preppyly
looking Americans in nice smart shirts
knock on your door and say, "Hey, you
know, we're going to teach you about
God. Come with us. We're going to give
you a community. We're going to give you
a space where you feel safe. We're going
to give you a future."
I think if you put someone in a space
where they feel unprotected and
unsupported and confused
and somebody knocks on their door with a
smiling face and a hand out and says,
"We're going to be here for you. going
to support you. A lot of people are
going to go. And when I went down to
that protest,
when I went down to that protest and I
saw the protesters on one side and the
and the counterprotest on the other side
shouting at each other and calling each
other names,
I find it quite upsetting to be honest.
And I couldn't help but ask myself
before I call these people names, have I
knocked on their door with my hand out?
Have we been there to offer them a story
of hope, a future, something that can
bring us together
rather than driving us apart? Because I
worry if that is the future of this
country. Half of us on one side of the
road, half of us on the other, shouting
names at each other, responding to
hatred with more hatred.
I wonder whether this could get worse
and worse. Um
I think if the working people of this
country are divided,
that's only going to benefit the rich
and uh ordinary families will get poorer
and poorer. But if we're united, we can
win.
So
this video is ultimately about the
importance of of understanding how the
media works, salience, storytelling, how
we win the future. But I think more than
that, it's about whether we're able to
view each other as people and with
compassion. Um because if we can do
that, then we can come together and if
we can come together, we can win. So
that's the end. Good luck. Thank you.